#Index|Category|Title|Tutorial text
00|Start|Start of Open Realm of Stars|Welcome to play Open Realm of Stars. This game is 4X(eXplore, eXpand, eXploit and eXterminate) space strategy game. Your objective is to become most powerful realm in the galaxy.
01|Start|First planet|Almost each realm has home planet. Home planets have only space port unless playing with elder realm. Each planet produces food, metal, production, credits, research and culture. Food is required for population growth. Metal and production are required for building ships and buildings. Credits can be used for many things like rushing building. Research is used for studying new technology and culture is used for gaining more influence in galaxy.
02|Start|First Building|Each planet has one building project. This can be either ship or building. It is highly recommend to have basic factory as a first building at home planet. Double click the planet and select your first building project.
03|Start|No starting planet|Not all realms have home planet. Ones without home planets are galactic nomads and they have more starting ships than other realms. However it is critical to find planet which can be colonized. This only way to start conquering the galaxy.
05|Movement|Basic movement|Space ships have two ways of move FTL and regular engine. FTL movement is done by clicking "Route FTL"-button or pressing R key. Then target sector is selected and fleet moves after end turn. FTL route is shown with blue route dots. Regular engine move is done when fleet is selected and pressing arrows keys or num pad keys. Also left clicking mouse on star map works. If clicked more than one sector away from fleet then regular moves can be assigned as a route. In this case route dots are green and yellow. Green dots are where is estimated route when turn ends. Yellow dots are route for later turns.
06|Movement|Exploring the space|Exploring the space should be done with regular engine. Moving in FTL makes scanner work when fleet stops. This will make blind spots unless fleet's scanners are not effective enough.
07|Movement|Exploring with Colony|Colony ship can be also used for space exploration. Just try to avoid risks like pirate space station and space anomalies and not wander too far way from the home planet so that if new colonizable planet is found colony ship can quickly get population on board.
12|Research|Boosting research|Research is done in separate research view. At the beginning of the game is very important to get basic lab building as fast as possible. Go to research view and increase research of Improvements so that new technology will be discovered at least in 9 turns.
13|Research|Research view|When 50% or more is discovered in technology level there is possibility to skip next level. In that case rest of the technologies in current level are skipped but one can start study immediately technology on next level. It is still possible to get these skipped technologies in diplomatic trades. Skipping is done when clicking the green up arrow next in research view. Each technology field has their own up arrows.
14|Research|Rare technology|Space anomalies can contain so called rare technology. This is technology which is not normally available by research. These needs to be found by exploring the galaxy. When rare tech is found it can be trade with other realms too. Some rare technology might have levels and if first level is acquired those higher levels can be reveal through regular research.
20|Planet|Planet discovered|If planet is habitable by your Realm, select starting colony ship and move at least single population to fleet and send it to colonize this planet. More planets realm has generally more powerful realm is. Not all planets are habitable by all space races. There are also some terraforming technologies which allow realm to colonize planets with higher radiation.
21|Planet|Gas Giant|Gas giants are huge planets which are not habitable. They can block fleet movement and also scanners are blocked by gas giants.
22|Planet|Rogue planet|Rogue planets are planets outside of solar system. Rogue planets are much harder to locate since they are space between solar systems. Rogue planets have slightly more metal than regular planets and radiation level maximum is only 5 compared to regular planet's 10. Rogue planets can be colonized as any other colonizable planet.
30|Objects in Space|Space anomaly|Space anomaly is unexplored local phenomena in space. By moving fleet on same sector reveals hidden secret from the space anomaly. These secrets can be positive or in some cases negative. Exploring these with strong military ship is recommend and not using colony or trade ships.
31|Objects in Space|Black hole|There is one super massive black hole in center of the galaxy. Super massive black hole blocks movement of space fleets.
32|Objects in Space|Deep Space Anchor|Deep space anchor is stable and safe place to build massive star bases. Any realm can deploy star base on free Deep Space Anchor by moving the star base on sector and viewing the fleet and pressing the Deploy star base button. Only deployed star base can use weapons in combat. Deployed star bases are also able to use star base modules to create culture, credits or research.
33|Objects in Space|Wormhole|Worm hole is found from space anomaly. Worm hole transfers fleet into another wormhole in galaxy when fleet moves into same sector as wormhole. All worm holes are connected to each others it is possible to end any one of them.
34|Objects in Space|Star|Star is very bright object in the space. It is always visible in star map. Stars are good points for starting the exploration is most of the planets are orbiting the star.
50|Space Combat|Space Combat|Space combat happens when two different realms fleet encounter in same sector. Combat happens in 9x9 arena. Each area can contain single ship. Attacker ships are at bottom and defender's ships are at up. Ships are placed in initiative order and the fastest ship will start the combat. Ships can move depending on their working engine.\n\nShips can have five different kind of weapons: Beam, Massdrives, Photon Torpedos, Missile or ECM missiles. Weapons are used by clicking the component button on right handside. Then cursor changes to crosshair. Then target can be selected if it is in weapon range. Space combat ends when another fleet is totally destroyed or escaped. There is also chance to get tie if no ship cannot cause damage to another ship.\n\nShips can have three different kind of defensive components: shield, armor and jammers. These are used automatically. Like are almost every other components too.
51|Space Combat|Beam weapons|Beam weapons have shortest range of all weapons, but these will have greatest hitting accuracy. Hitting accuracy against medium ships is 100%. Beam weapons are excellent against armors but they can be easily deflected with shields.
52|Space Combat|Mass drives|Mass drives have medium range of all weapons and these will have medium hit accuracy. Hitting accuracy against medium ships is 75%. Mass drives are excellent againts shields but armors can easily deflect their damage.
53|Space Combat|Photon Torpedos|Photon torpedos have medium range of all weapons and these will have medium hit accuracy. Hitting accuracy against medium ships is 75%. Photon torpedos are excellent againts armors but they can be easily deflected with shields.
54|Space Combat|Missiles|Missile weapons have high range but have low accuracy. Hitting accuracy against medium ships is 50%. Missile weapons are great againts shields but armors can protect against them more efficiently.
55|Space Combat|ECM Missile|ECM missiles have very high range but low accuracy. Hitting accuracy againt medium ships is 50%. ECM Missile do not cause hull damage. They cause direct damage to shields. They do not cause damage either to armors.
56|Space Combat|Shields|Shields are protective component. These are good againts Beam weapons and photon torpedos. Shields are regenerated after one full combat turn. So it is important to hit more than once against shielded ship during one full turn.\n\nOverload: Increase shield level by one
57|Space Combat|Armors|Armors are protective component. These are good against mass drives and missile weapons. Armors will also work even without power. Armors are fixed automatically after combat but not during the combat.
58|Space Combat|Jammers|Jammers make the hitting more difficult against the ship. These are general purpose protective components which work against every weapon system. Of course these are weaker against beam weapons since they have highest accuracy.\n\nOverload: Triple the effect of jammer for one turn
59|Space Combat|Privateering|Privateering happens in space combat. Privateer ship moves next to trade ship and then privateer component is selected to use. Cursor changes to skull icon and trade ship can be looted now. Note that after looting trade ships needs to travel back to planet to get more cargo.
60|Space Combat|Targeting computers|Targeting computers increase hitting accuracy of the all weapons ships has. This is good combination with missile weapons, since missile weapons have low accuracy.\n\nOverloading: Overloaded targeting computers increase critical hit chance for one turn.
61|Space Combat|Overloading|Quite many ship components expect weapons can be overload during combat. This overloading gives some benefit or boost during combat. Problem is that this will drain some extra energy from ship. If ship's energy levels goes negative energy surge can happen and all components lose energy for one turn, including ship's shield. Overloading components also increase risk of getting component damaged during overload.
70|Ship Design|Design principals|Each ship design must have hull which is the base of the ship designs. There are 5 different kind of ship hull types: Normal, Freighter, Probe, Starbase and privateer. Normal ship can have weapons, but no cargo capabilities or privateering modules. Freighters cannot have weapons or privateering modules but they can have cargo on empty hull slots.\n\nEach hull has different amount of hull slots available. More there are slots available more larger ships will be generally. Smaller ships are harder to hit and has better initiative but they can take less damage than the bigger ones. Each hull slot has certain number hull points which also depends on ship hull. For example Scout Mk1 has 4 hull slots and each slot has one hull point. So after taking four points of damage it will be destroyed. Destroyer Mk1 has 6 hull slots and each of them has one hull points. Each ship must have at least one engine and zero or more energy left to be valid design. Ship design view will also say if there is something else missing from the ship design.
71|Ship Design|Hull type Probe|Probe is small hull type which cannot have weapons, cargo or privateering modules. Good thing is that it has FTL speed one faster than attached engine otherwise would have.
72|Ship Design|Hull type Starbase|Starbases are special hull type which can have weapons and starbase modules. They cannot have cargo space or privateering modules. Starbases can move before they are deployed. After deploying they will stay on that deep space anchor. When deployed starbases can use weapons and starbase modules, but after deploying they cannot move anymore not even in the space combat. On the other hand starbase weapons have increased range on weapons.
73|Ship Design|Hull type Privateer|Privateers are special hull type which can have weapons and privateering modules. Privateering modules allow steal cargo during space combat from freighters. Privateers are also ships which do not posses any marking of realms who controls them. Therefore privateers are excellent ships for spying.
74|Ship Design|Hull type Freighter|Freighter ships can be used for colonize ships, trade ships, troop carrier or even ship carriers. Ship carriers are only versions which do not need free space on ship but require fighter bays onboard. Troop carries require planetary invasion module. Colony ships require colonization module. Note that trooper and colony ship must have at least single free space for carrier troops or population. Trade ships are ships which do not have special modules just free space to carry cargo goods. More space they have more credits they will generate while trading.
75|Ship Design|Hull type Normal|Normal ships are one which carry weapons but no special modules. These type of hulls are good for space combat and exploring the unknown space.
76|Ship Design|Engine|Engines are ship components which make the ship move. Engines have three different movement speed: Regular moves, FTL and combat speed. Regular movements are used when moving during your own turn. FTL movement is used when fleet is assigned for route. Combat speed is being used during combat. Nuclear Drivers are the only engine which do not require energy but instead they produce energy. Drawback is that those are rather slow in FTL travel. There can be only one engine type per ship design, but there can be two or more exactly same engines. In that case extra engines are working as backup engines.\n\nOverload: Add one extra move for turn
77|Ship Design|Energy source|Almost all components in ships require energy. Components are listed in energy priority order. Top components will get first the energy. Ships can have multiple energy source for two reasons: No good enough energy sources has been discovered or making sure that one destroyed energy source does not cripple the whole ship. So it is always recommended to but weapons and shields on top of the list and scanners and other not crucial components on low part of the list.\n\nExtra energy can be also used for overloading components during space combat. Shields, jammers, cloaking devices, targeting computers, engines and thrusters can be overloaded during combat. If energy level drops negative it possible to surge whole ship's energy for one turn. This will then force all shield go down.
78|Ship Design|Cloaking device|Cloaking device will hide ships from the enemy scanners. Cloaked ships will be invisible at space map if there are no strong enough scanners available. Cloaking device will also make hitting in space combat 5% more difficult. If cloaking device is overloaded during combat then ship cannot be locked as target for one turn. Cloaking device also allows fleet commander to perform espionage missions undetected.\n\nOverload: Overloaded cloaking prevents weapons to lock on ship.
79|Ship Design|Espionage module|Espionage module allows espionage over the realm which sector fleet currently is. This espionage information can be used for estimating how strong military realm has. With espionage module fleet commander can also perform espionage missions against target realm. This can be done when fleet is next to another realm's planet and going to fleet view and clicking the espionage mission.
80|Ship Design|Scanner|Scanners are used for revealing sectors from longer distance. Each turn will hide map into fog of war unless there are scanners near by. Scanners can also reveal cloaked fleets. Scanners have to ability scanning distance and cloaking detection.\n\nOverload: Reveal overloaded cloaked ships.
81|Ship Design|Orbital bombs|Orbital bombs are used when conquering enemy planet. These will destroy population and buildings from the surface. Bombs can be divided into two categories: regular ones and nuclear ones. Regular bombs require more usage than nuclear bombs and can destroy buildings more than population. Nuclear bombs are very effective to destroy population. Drawback from nuclear bombs is that planet's radiation might rise during bombing. Also other realms generally thinking using nuclear bomb is unethical.
90|Diplomacy|Diplomacy with other Realms|Diplomacy is very important part of the game. With diplomacy realms can join into different type of alliances which benefit both parties. With diplomacy it is also possible to trade technology, fleets and planets. Planets are usually trade only when trying to make peace after long war. Realms also remember how they were treated previously. If they were treated badly, they will treat you also badly. If they are treated good they will treat you also good. Also military power difference is important. Aggressive realms can make war with weaker realms if military power difference grows too large.
91|Diplomacy|Technology trading|Diplomacy allows trading technology between two realms. Technology can be traded for another technology, credits or any other tradeable. Better technology is much more expensive than early game technology.
92|Diplomacy|Map trading|There are two different maps which are tradeable: Full galaxy maps and colonized planet maps. Trading full maps is always a risk your realm has discovered colonized planet which you haven't colonized yet. Other realm might have time to colonized faster than you. Full galaxy map might also reveal where are other possible realms and what parts of galaxy has been studied. After forming trade alliance it is useful to trade maps so that trade fleets can start trading. Therefore there is possiblity to trade map of colonized planets of the realms.
93|Diplomacy|Fleet trading|In diplomacy trading it is possible to trade fleets between other realms. Sometimes it makes sense to sell obsolete fleets for another realms. Having lot's of fleet costs also credit so why not sell old ones and get few credits for those. Usually realms are not willing to sell fleet unless they really are not needed anymore. Sometimes it is possible to get fleets when making peacy treaty after long war.
94|Diplomacy|Planet trading|In diplomacy trading it is possible to planets to other realms. Trading planets are only done in very grave situation. Other realm must be much stronger than the other and promise to have peace after trade.
95|Diplomacy|Espionage trade|If both realms have espionage they can trade this information between each others. This will give boost for espionage against third realm. Espionage trades last 20 turns.
96|Diplomacy|Diplomacy victory|There is possiblity to win Open Realm of Stars by diplomacy. It requires becoming candidate of ruler of the galaxy. First realm who builds required amount of United Galaxy Towers will become first candidate for ruler of the galaxy. Second candidate is voted. It can be based on military power or whom has most of the United Galaxy Towers. After this is final voting for Galaxy Ruler from these two candidates. There is also possibility to have more diplomatic votes, depending on galaxy settings. These votings can be made as promises on diplomatic trades.
97|Diplomacy|Voting promises|Realms can promise or ask another realm to vote certainly. These promises can cost quite a lot. If these promises are kept it will give diplomatic bonuses between these realms and on the other hand if they are broken this will give negative diplomatic bonuses.
98|Diplomacy|Galactic Olympics|Galactic olympics can be arrange to boost realms diplomatic bonuses. Each realm can decided if they want to participate on these games. If they participate there will diplomatic bonuses between participants and organizer. If realm decides to boycott games, there will be negative bonus between realm who boycotted and organizer. On the other hand all realms who boycotted the games will get diplomatic bonuses between each others.
100|Diplomacy|Peace treaty|Peace treaty is start of friendship. It forbids space combat and planetary invasions between two realms. Fleets are not allowed enter other realms sector. Long lasting peace gives diplomatic bonus between two realms.
101|Diplomacy|Trade alliance|Trade alliance between two realms allows non combat fleets to enter other realm sectors. Therefore trade alliance allows trade fleets to go other realm planets to make trade. Trading benefits both parties for gaining extra credit.
102|Diplomacy|Defensive pact|Defensive pact is deeper alliance than trade alliance. It allows military ships travel other realm's sectors. Also if third realm make war against either realm in defensive pact that war will start against all parties in defensive pact. Defensive pact does not make ware if one member of defensive pact makes war against third party.
103|Diplomacy|Alliance|Alliance is the deepest form of two realms working together. There can be only two realms in alliance. Alliance has same military benefits as in defensive pact. If one the alliance party makes war against third party another realm in alliance is not in war against the third party. Alliance scores and victory conditions are combined. For example culture points are added together. Same goes also for technological achievement or victory domination. In short to say when checking the victory conditions realms in alliance are treated as a single realm.
104|Diplomacy|Trade embargo|Trade embargo is agreement of two realms where to announce embargo against the third realm. Realms making the trade embargo gain diplomatic bonuses towards each others. Third realm gets negative diplomacy bonuses. Trade embargo lasts always 20 turns. When it ends diplomatic relation goes back to peace or stays in war if there is war. When trade embargo status is between two realms these two realms cannot send trade fleets towards each others. Regular diplomatic trades are allowed.
105|Diplomacy|War|War allows space combat and planetary invasions between two realms. Realm who starts the war gets negative diplomacy bonus towards all other realms. Long lasting wars are expensive for non-hivemind governments. Having wars will increase war exhaust on realms which makes people unhappy.
120|Leaders|Leaders|Leaders are special characters which can be acting as realm ruler, planet governor or fleet commander. Leaders have special perks which give bonus(negative or positive) for their job they are doing. After gaining experience leader will gain new level and new perks. Leaders will only live for certain amount of time depending of the leader's race and perks.\n\nRulers for certain governments can get heirs which are basically free leaders. Heirs are selected as for next rulers and they can have bad perks. Governments which choose their ruler by voting usually get better rulers.
121|Leaders|Ruler|Ruler is the leader which leads the whole Realm. It will give AI realm's partial personality how it will behave. Ruler specific perks are something that affect for whole realm like giving credit or science bonus. Ruler can be also giving diplomatic bonus for diplomacy. Ruler is the only position where leader is selected automatically. Ruler reign time can be also limited and this depends on realm's government. Reign time can be also for whole life time.
122|Leaders|Governor|Governor is a leader which leaders single planet. Governor specific perks gives boost for the planet like increasing productivity, happiness, credits or science for example. Player can assign any available leader as for governor. Governor can be assigned from planet view by clicking the assign governor button.\n\nGovernor can be given guide what buildings or ships governor should choose. If planet has governor when construction is finished governor will choose next one. Of course this can be changed if wanted or needed.
123|Leaders|Commander|Commander is leader which leads single fleet. Fleet command specific perks gives boost for that fleet like increasing speed, scanner range, espionage bonus for example. Fleet commadeder is also required to fleet have to actually perform espionage missions against other realms. These can be done when moving fleet next to another realm's planet and select espionage mission from fleet view. Fleet commander can be assigned from fleet view by clicking the assign leader.
124|Leaders|Level up|When leader gains new level he or she will gain also new perk. Most like she or he will get perk that is related to his or her current task. There is 10% chance for getting so called "bad" perk on level up.
125|Leaders|Military rank|When fleet commander gains level he or she will also gain higher military rank. Military rank lieutenant is also gained if commander is still ensign when turning 50 years old. Military rank only purpose is for getting nice title for leader.
126|Leaders|Heir is born|Realm ruler in certain government may receive heirs. Heirs are possible rulers of the realm after current ruler has died. Before that heir can work as normal leader as governor or fleet commander. Before heir can work as leader he or she must be 18 years old. Same applies also for ruler. If parent dies before heir is 18 years old, some one would be come ruler. Heirs can be born only for living rulers. Mechions cannot have heirs.
127|Leaders|Death|Leaders have limited lifespan which depends on their race. Mechions have longest lifespan 2000 years, which makes them practically immortals during game time. Leaders can also die by accidents, during combats or even by another leader if that leader wants to be a new leader.\n\nIf ruler dies then new ruler will be selected for the realm. This is something where player cannot affect anyway. Depending on government certain perks are more valuable when selecting new ruler or if government has heir system then one the heirs is going to be next ruler. Democratic governments there is also a bit of luck when selecting the ruler as representing people's voting behavior. Generally speaking democratic government rulers should be diplomatic, charismatic and something that benefits the people and where kings and empirors should be more stronger and militaristic.
128|Leaders|Leader recruit|Leader can be recruit when one of realm's planet has 5 or more population. Recruiting leader will always cost one population from planet and certain amount of credits which depends on realm's government type. Also how many leaders realm has affects on recruit cost. Different governments have limited size of leader pool. If leader amount goes over this limit, recruiting cost will go up very fast.\n\nThere are two buildings which gives bonus for newly recruited leader. Barracks gives new leader 50 experience points. Space academy gives leader one extra level when leader has been recruited. Leader is being recruited from planet which has most population and which gives best boost for new leader. New leaders can be immediately assigned as a governor or fleet leader. Leader can be recruited from Leaders view or from planet view's assign leader or fleet view's assign leader.
129|Leaders|Ruler selected|Ruler selection is only job where player cannot directly influence. Selection is affect by perks leaders have and if rulers have heirs these heirs have highest priority. Perks which are important for rule depends on realm's government type. There are couple which are beneficial no matter what government type is. For example wealthy or charismatic perks are giving good bonus when selecting next leader. Power hungry is also very effective. In some governments it is possible that leaders with power hungry perk assassinate current leader in order to get him or herself as a ruler.
130|Leaders|Unassigned leader|Rulers should be assigned to some task. They usually give some bonus and while they are doing task they also gain experience and eventually gain new levels and new perks. Reasons why realm might have unassigned leader is that heir has just reached adulthood or new ruler was selected and old one hasn't been assigned yet. There could be also some random events which may cause leaders to be unassigned.
150|Victory|Highest score|Open Realm of Stars can be won by getting the highest score by realm or two realms in alliance. This highest score is checked when game turn limit is being reached. Which ever realm or alliance has highest score will win the game.
151|Victory|Culture victory|Open Realm of Stars can be won by getting highest culture by realm or two realms in alliance. It is not enough just to get highest culture value, realms need to be spreading it which means that they have built certain buildings on any of their planet. Also other realms must be absorbing the culture. This means that one less than half of the realms must have at least trade alliance with that realm. When all these requirements are met then game ends with cultural victory.
152|Victory|Domination victory|Open Realm of Stars can be won by getting half of the home planets under control of realm or two realms in alliance. When this happens game ends immediately to domination victory.
153|Victory|Scientific victory|Open Realm of Stars can be won by building enough scientific achievements on single planet. If two realms are in alliance and one those build these on single planet they both then win the scientific victory. These scientific achievements are very costly buildings and number of these required to win is configured in galaxy setup. When these buildings are done game ends immediately.
154|Victory|Population victory|Open Realm of Stars can be won by getting certain per centage of all population in the galaxy. There is requirement that at least 100 turns must have passed before this is being checked. Also two realms in alliance can win this together as long as they have population in total over this limit. When these conditions are met game ends immediately.
155|Victory|Diplomatic victory|Open Realm of Stars can be won by winning the voting for Galactic Ruler. This requires having enough of United Galaxy Towers. First one realm whom builds enough United Galaxy Towers will be selected to Galactic Secretary. That realm is the first candidate for Galactic Rulers. Then there will number different galactic votings. After have passed is going to be voting for the second candidate. Second candidate can be that which realm has either second highest amount of United Galaxy Towers or highest military value. Not this military value is checked from GBNC records which might not be accurate. When second candidate has been selected then there will be final vote for Galactic Ruler. When that has been voted game ends immediately. Note that realms can ask other realms to vote certain way by doing favors in diplomacy.